                                                                                                      January 30, 2026




        MuCO: Generative Peptide Cyclization Empowered by
        Multi-stage Conformation Optimization
        Yitian Wang 1,3 , Fanmeng Wang 1,3 , Angxiao Yue 1 , Wentao Guo∗ 2 , Yaning Cui 3 ,
        Hongteng Xu† 1,4,5
        1
          Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
        2
          WuXi AppTec
        3
          DP Technology
        4
          Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance
        5
          Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE


                                                          Abstract
        Modeling peptide cyclization is critical for the virtual screening of candidate peptides with desirable
        physical and pharmaceutical properties. This task is challenging because a cyclic peptide often
        exhibits diverse, ring-shaped conformations, which cannot be well captured by deterministic pre-
        diction models derived from linear peptide folding. In this study, we propose MuCO (Multi-stage
        Conformation Optimization), a generative peptide cyclization method that models the distribution of
        cyclic peptide conformations conditioned on the corresponding linear peptide. In principle, MuCO
        decouples the peptide cyclization task into three stages: topology-aware backbone design, generative
        side-chain packing, and physics-aware all-atom optimization, thereby generating and optimizing
        conformations of cyclic peptides in a coarse-to-fine manner. This multi-stage framework enables
        an efficient parallel sampling strategy for conformation generation and allows for rapid exploration
        of diverse, low-energy conformations. Experiments on the large-scale CPSea dataset demonstrate
        that MuCO significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in consistently in physical stability,
        structural diversity, secondary structure recovery, and computational efficiency, making it a promising
        computational tool for exploring and designing cyclic peptides.



1           Introduction
Cyclic peptides constitute a significant subset for drug discovery, chemical biology, and material design (Jing
and Jin, 2020; Ji et al., 2024; Song et al., 2021), whose ring-closed conformations confer them enhanced
stability, proteolytic resistance, membrane permeability, and target-binding specificity compared to the
corresponding linear peptides (Dougherty et al., 2019; Mannes et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2019). In general, a
cyclic peptide exists as highly dynamic conformational ensembles exploring a complex energy landscape
shaped by geometric constraints (Schlick et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2025; Zorzi et al., 2017). Peptide cyclization
refers to predicting cyclic peptide conformations given linear peptide sequences or conformations. It helps
identify unobserved potential wells and explore hidden conformations governing biological activity (Persch
et al., 2015; Sekhar and Kay, 2013), which is essential for the virtual screening of peptides with desirable
physical and pharmaceutical properties.
Currently, physical simulation methods (Pracht et al., 2020; Hollingsworth and Dror, 2018) offer relatively
high precision in peptide cyclization. However, they are computationally prohibitive for large-scale explo-
ration, which motivates the development of learning based methods. Focusing on peptide cyclization, the
general protein folding method, such as AlphaFold3 (AF3) (Abramson et al., 2024), remains suboptimal,
struggling with ring closure and atomic clashes (Zhang et al., 2025). Specialized methods like HighFold2 (Zhu
    ∗
        Work done while at Atombeat Inc.
    †
        Corresponding authors. Email: hongtengxu@ruc.edu.cn


                                                               1
Figure 1 . An illustration of the 3-stage scheme of MuCO. The generation process is decoupled into three stages,
including i) Topology-Aware Backbone Generation for backbone scaffold B by SE(3) flow matching on condition of
sequence embedding, ii) Generative Side-chain Packing for side chain sampling via conditional flow matching with
cyclic RPE, iii) Physics-Aware Optimization by Charmm36 forcefield to yield final energy minimized conformation.


et al., 2025) and AfCycDesign (Rettie et al., 2025) are based on AlphaFold2 (AF2) (Jumper et al., 2021)
and cyclize peptides by deterministic folding, thereby failing to generate diverse conformations. As a result,
given a linear peptide, how to generate cyclic peptide conformations with guaranteed physical rationale and
diversity is still an open problem.
In this study, we propose MuCO, an effective conformation generation method for cyclic peptides, which
achieves promising peptide cyclization via Multi-stage Conformation Optimization. As illustrated in
Figure 1, MuCO decouples peptide cyclization into three stages, including i) topology-aware cyclic backbone
generation, ii) generative side-chain packing, and iii) physics-aware conformation optimization. Given
a linear peptide, the first stage generates diverse backbone scaffolds that satisfy the ring-closure (Huguet
et al., 2024). The second stage finds optimal rotamer configurations for each backbone, generating full-atom
conformations through side-chain sampling and suppressing the risk of steric clashes (Lee and Kim, 2025).
The third stage applies Charmm36 (Huang and Jr., 2013) to fine-tune the local geometry of each conformation
under potential energy minimization, guiding the conformations into a valid and stable molecular space.
Compared to existing methods (Zhu et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025), MuCO has advantages on both
computational efficiency and generation quality. In particular, unlike the end-to-end strategy that attempts
to simultaneously predict or generate all atoms, the multi-stage framework of MuCO supports an efficient
parallel sampling strategy that rapidly identifies potential wells and various cyclization modes that are often
inaccessible in single-shot or several-shot predictors. As a result, MuCO can generate reliable conformations
with high efficiency. Experiments on the large-scale CPSea dataset (Yang et al., 2025) demonstrate that
MuCO significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods (Zhu et al., 2025), particularly in physical stability,
structural diversity, secondary structure recovery, and computational efficiency.


2     Related Work
2.1   Peptide Folding and Design
The prediction of peptide conformation has largely followed the protein folding paradigm. AF2 (Jumper et al.,
2021) accurately folds peptides using MSAs, while ESMFold (Lin et al., 2022) leverages protein language
models (PLMs) to infer structures directly from single sequences, bypassing the need for alignment searching.
Recently, generative modeling has expanded this frontier: AlphaFold3 (Abramson et al., 2024), Chai-1 (Chai
Discovery team et al., 2024), Boltz-1 (Wohlwend et al., 2025; Passaro et al., 2025), and SimpleFold (Wang
et al., 2025b) utilize diffusion based or iterative refinement modules to generate high-fidelity all-atom
conformations for peptides.


                                                       2
                                 z0 ∈ MB : (SE(3) × T)L                 χ0 ∈ MC : T4L




                            hS         Stage 1:           Backbone B        Stage 2:            X     Stage 3:
    Sequence       Frozen
                                                                                                f
                                    Topology-Aware                         Generative               Physics-Aware   X
       S           ESM-2                                               Side-chain Packing           Optimization
                                    Backbone Gen.


                                                                         Cyclic RPE Injection



Figure 2 . MuCO framework overview. The process decouples into three stages: (1) cyclic backbone generation on
MB , (2) side-chain packing on MC with Cyclic RPE, and (3) physics-aware refinement to reach the local energy
minimum X.


Unlike the above end-to-end folding methods, some methods generate peptide conformations by two steps:
backbone design and side-chain packing. For backbone design, FrameDiff (Yim et al., 2023b) and Frame-
Flow (Yim et al., 2023a) apply SE(3) diffusion and flow matching to generate protein backbones, respectively.
Based on them, FoldFlow (Bose et al., 2024) and FoldFlow2 (Huguet et al., 2024) further integrate optimal
transport and sequence conditioning (via ESM based embeddings (Lin et al., 2022)) to generate diverse
scaffold topologies. ReQFlow (Yue et al., 2025) improves the generation efficiency using rectified quaternion
flows. For side-chain packing, methods like DiffPack (Zhang et al., 2023), H-Packer (Visani et al., 2024), and
FlowPacker (Lee and Kim, 2025) treat rotamer packing as a generative problem, learning the conditional
distribution of side-chains given a fixed backbone These decoupled generation methods have been widely
used in protein design, which is applicable for generating peptide conformations.
The above methods achieve a promising progress in linear peptide folding and design. However, they are
often inapplicable in cyclic peptide generation because of lacking appropriate ring-closure constraints.

2.2     Cyclic Peptide Modeling and Generation
Focusing on cyclic peptide modeling and generation, the mainstream solution is adapting models pretrained
on linear peptides. AfCycDesign (Rettie et al., 2025) and HighFold2 (Zhu et al., 2025) modify the Relative
Positional Encoding (RPE) of AF2 to ensure ring-closure. CP-Composer (Jiang et al., 2025) decomposes
cyclic constraints into linear sub-units and achieves zero-shot cyclic peptide design. These methods, however,
are not trained on true cyclic peptides because of the data scarcity issue, which limits their abilities to find
ring-closure, low-energy conformations. As a result, they often fail to model the specific strain and distortions
introduced by cyclization.
The recent release of the CPSea dataset (Yang et al., 2025) provides the first large-scale resource of cyclic
peptide conformations, enabling a paradigm shift from linear-to-cyclic adaptation to native cyclic generation.
By leveraging the dataset, our work proposes a multi-stage conformation optimization strategy for generative
peptide cyclization, generating high-quality conformational ensembles of cyclic peptides efficiently.

3     Proposed Method
3.1     Problem Formulation and Modeling Principle
As mentioned above, we formulate peptide cyclization as a conditional generation problem. Denote S =
{s1 , . . . , sL } as a linear peptide of length L, where si represents the type of the i-th residue. Denote
X ∈ RN ×3 as the N 3D atomic coordinates of the corresponding cyclic peptide. Following the rigid-frame
convention (Jumper et al., 2021), we can parametrize X equivalently by the rigid transformation of backbone
and internal torsion angles of side chains:
     • Backbone scaffold B : The backbone geometry is represented by the tuple B = {(Ti , ψi )}L  i=1 . Here,
       Ti = (Ri , ti ) ∈ SE(3) denotes the rigid transformation of the local frame of the i-th residue (con-

                                                               3
      structed from the “N − Cα − C − O” structure of residue), where Ri ∈ SO(3) is the rotation matrix and
      ti ∈ R3 is the translation vector. Additionally, ψi ∈ T is the backbone torsion angle determining the
      position of the carbonyl oxygen atom, where T = R/2π Z denotes the 1-torus representing the angular
      periodicity.
   • Side chains C : The conformation of side-chains is parameterized by a set of torsion angles C = {χi }L    i=1 .
                                                                                                            4
     For each residue si , the side chain is determined by up to four angles χi = [χi,1 , . . . , χi,4 ] ∈ T .
This geometric data representation captures rotational invariance and local rigidity of conformation, and the
atomic coordinates X can be recovered by the Forward Kinematics function, i.e., X = FK(B, C).
We aim to learn the conditional distribution p(X|S) and sample diverse conformations that are ring-closure
and low-energy efficiently from p(X|S), which leads to the proposed MuCO method.
In principle, MuCO leverages the equivalence between p(X|S) and p(B, C|S) and the hierarchical structure
of p(B, C|S) to model p(X|S) in a decomposed format:
                                 p(X|S) = p(B, C|S) = p(B|S) · p(C|B, S)                                        (1)
                                                      | {z } | {z }
                                                            Backbone   Side chains

Here, p(B|S) is conditional distribution the backbone scaffold B given the residue sequence S , and p(C|B, S)
is the conditional distribution of the side chains C given B and S . Based on this decomposition, MuCO
achieves a three-stage conformation optimization pipeline. As illustrated in Figure 1, it generates multiple
cyclic peptide conformations given a linear peptide S by
              1) Backbone generation:           {Bk }K
                                                     k=1 ∼ pθ (·|S),
                                            k M
              2) Side-chain packing:      {Cm }m=1 ∼ pτ (·|Bk , S),             ∀k,
                                            k
                                          fm = FK(Bk , Cm k                                                     (2)
              3) Conformation refinement: X                 ),
                                                 k                         k
                                                Xm = arg min E(X) + R(X, X
                                                                         fm  ),             ∀k, m.
                                                             X

The first stage samples K multiple cyclic backbones, the second stage generates K × M conformations
by sampling M side-chain rotamers for each backbone. Finally, the third stage achieves energy-driven
conformation refinement, where E denotes the energy functional of atoms and R denotes the regularization
term determined by the initial conformation X
                                            fmk . Here, p(B|S) and p(C|B, S) are parameterized by two

generative models, whose parameters are denoted as θ and τ , respectively. In such a situation, the first
two stages can be executed in parallel on GPUs, which reduces the amortized runtime per conformation
significantly.
The keypoint of MuCO lies in ensuring the above three stages achieve consistent conformation optimization.
In particular, Stage-1 should generate backbones with guaranteed ring-closure structures. Stage-2 should
resolve steric clashes in dense environments. Stage-3 should refine the all-atom conformations, maintaining
the ring-closure structures and avoiding steric clashes. Moreover, the second and third stages should reduce
the potential energy of conformation consistently. In the following content, we will introduce the technical
details of MuCO and show how the above requirements are satisfied.

3.2   Multi-stage Conformation Optimization
Figure 2 illustrates the computational pipeline of MuCO. To meet the above requirements, our MuCO method
imposes implicit cyclization constraints into the model by training on the cyclic peptide dataset and applies
force field optimization in Stage-3, enabling cyclization to emerge naturally with guarantees in rationality
and diversity. Detailed training strategy is provided in Appendix A
Stage-1: Topology-Aware Cyclic Backbone Generation. Following FoldFlow2 (Huguet et al., 2024), we
employ a sequence-conditioned SE(3) flow matching framework for cyclic backbone generation. We model a

                                                        4
conditional probability path pt (B|S) that interpolates between a simple prior distribution p0 (typically a Gaus-
sian distribution on R3 and isotropic distribution on SO(3)) and the data distribution p1 over time t ∈ [0, 1].
This process is governed by the velocity field on the manifold of backbone, denoted as MB := SE(3)L × TL .
We parameterize the velocity field vθB (zt , t, hS ) by an Invariant Point Attention (IPA) Transformer (Jumper
et al., 2021), where t ∈ [0, 1], hS is the embedding of the linear peptide, derived from a pre-trained ESM-2
model (Lin et al., 2022). zt is the backbone state at time t, where z0 = {Ti0 = (Ri0 , t0i )}L   i=1 is noise sampled
from the prior distribution, z1 = {Ti1 = (Ri1 , t1i )}L    i=1 is observed data, and z t = {T i
                                                                                               t = (Rt , tt )}L with
                                                                                                       i i i=1
tti = (1 − t) · t0i + t · t1i and Rit = expRi0 (t · logRi0 (Ri1 )).
Applying Riemannian flow matching (Bose et al., 2024; Chen and Lipman, 2024), we can train the model via
                                                                               2
                                minθ Et,z1 ,zt vθB (zt , t, hS ) − uB
                                                                    t (zt |z1 ) T M ,                            (3)

where ∥ · ∥T M denotes the Riemannian metric on the tangent space, uB
                                                                    t is the velocity field determined by zt .
For the backbone torsion angles {ψi }L
                                     i=1 , we can generate them by passing the last-layer embeddings of vθB
by an MLP.
Remark 1: Training on cyclic peptides leads to implicit ring-closure constraints. Here, a critical challenge
is to ensure the ring-closure structures of the generated backbones. Traditional methods train models on
linear peptides and impose hard geometric constraints during generation (Rettie et al., 2025; Zhu et al., 2025)
or apply post-hoc energy minimization to force closure (Zhang et al., 2025), which may introduce unnatural
physical bond strains or atom clashes. With the help of the CPSea dataset (Yang et al., 2025), we can train
our model directly on cyclic peptides (see the data construction part of the following experimental section),
making cyclization an intrinsic geometric property encoded within the conformational subspace. After
training on cyclic peptides, the ring-closure structures are fitted by the learned velocity field vθB — the model
captures the global trajectory of all residues, whose endpoints are cyclic backbones with high probabilities.
Consequently, the generated backbones serve as geometrically valid scaffolds for the subsequent packing
stage.
Stage-2: Conditional Generative Side-chain Packing. Once the backbone scaffold B is determined, the
next challenge is to fill it with side-chain rotamers C . We explicitly model the conditional distribution
pτ (C|B, S) in the Torsional Flow Matching (TFM) framework (Lee and Kim, 2025). In particular, the space
of side chain is a high-dimensional hypertorus MC = T4L , where each dimension corresponds to a periodic
torsion angle χ. We learn a velocity field vtC : T4L × [0, 1] × SE(3)L → T × T4L that transports noise
sampled from a uniform prior distribution from the torus sampled from the target rotamer distribution. The
optimization problem of TFM is
                                                                                2
                              minτ Et,χ1 ,χt vτC (χt , t, B, S) − uCt (χt |χ1 ) T ,                              (4)

where vτC is parameterzied by Equivariant Graph Neural Network (EGNN), uCt is the conditional vector field
derived from the geodesic path on the torus, and χt is the interpolation between the random noise χ0 and
sampled data χ1 at time t. Notably, vτC is conditioned on the backbone B and the sequence S . We extract
E(3)-invariant geometric features from B and fuse them with sequence embeddings hS as the input of vτC .
Crucially, by modeling the distribution rather than regressing a single conformation (Wang et al., 2025a),
we gain the flexibility to sample multiple plausible rotameric states for residues under high steric stress,
effectively breathing within the tight rigid cyclic backbone.
Remark 2: Cyclic-aware graph encoding mitigates clashes. Existing packing models like DiffPack (Zhang
et al., 2023) and FlowPacker (Lee and Kim, 2025) rely on linear relative positional encodings (RPE), which
assume that residue 1 and residue L are spatially and sequentially distant. This assumption breaks down in
cyclic peptides: The geometric constraints of ring-closure often force side chains to be folded into a compact
space, creating a high-density environment where packers struggle to find clash-free solutions. Similar to
existing methods (Rettie et al., 2025; Zhu et al., 2025), we construct a residue graph Gcyc for each B and


                                                          5
augment vτC with a cyclic-aware graph encoding mechanism to resolve the clashing issue. In particular,
denote the adjacency matrix of Gcyc as A = [aij ] ∈ {0, 1}L×L , aij = 1 iff the residues si and sj are adjacent.
Accordingly, for any two residues i and j , the cyclic topological distance, denoted as dcyc (i, j), is defined as
the shortest path distance between them. Given this cyclic metric, we replace the linear RPE with a Cyclic
Relative Positional Encoding: injecting the metric into the node-to-node attention bias of the underlying
EGNN (e.g., EquiformerV2 (Liao et al., 2024)). By topologically rewiring the graph, the model perceives
the boundary residues as immediate neighbors. This allows our model to generate coordinated side-chain
packing across the cyclization junction, suppressing critical steric clashes.
Training details of Stage-1 and Stage-2 are provided in Appendix A.
Stage-3: Physics-Aware Conformation Optimization. While the preceding flow matching stages effectively
navigate the global conformational landscape to identify favorable high-probability regions, the generated
atomic coordinates are inherently stochastic samples from a learned distribution. For each generated
conformation, while the global topology might be reasonable, its local atomic placements often exhibit minor
deviations from ideal bond lengths or van der Waals radii, leading to high-energy steric clashes. This is
particularly pronounced in sampling-based approaches compared to deterministic prediction methods, as
the model prioritizes distributional diversity over mean-squared-error minimization. To resolve this issue,
we implement a physics-aware refinement stage like CP-Composer Jiang et al. (2025) does, applying a
Charmm36 based force field engine (Huang and Jr., 2013) to optimize generated conformations and filtering
out invalid ones.
To automate this process for diverse cyclization modes without manual intervention, we design a rule-based
topology detection algorithm, which can automatically infer the intended covalent connectivity based on the
proximity of reactive groups in the generated conformation Xf, and apply our updated force field engine to
minimize the energy (detailed algorithms provided in Appendix B).
Remark 3: The guarantee on energy minimization. Notably, this process corresponds to the energy-driven
conformation optimization shown in (2). When applying Charmm36, we design the E(X) in (2) as the
potential energy of X based on atomic coordinates and bonds, and implement the R(X, X)        f in (2) as
w           2
 2 ∥X − X∥F , with a weight w > 0. In such a situation, Charmm36 optimizes conformation by force-field
         f
relaxation with Langevin thermostat (Davidchack et al., 2009), reducing the potential energy monotonically
during optimization.
In summary, MuCO leverages the best of both worlds: the generative flow efficiently jumps across high-
energy barriers to explore diverse potential wells, while the physics based optimization ensures that the final
structures descend into valid, physically realizable local minima.

3.3    Efficient Exploration via Hierarchical Sampling
A critical advantage of MuCO’s decoupled framework over monolithic end-to-end models (e.g., HighFold2)
is the capability for efficient, tree-structured parallel sampling. Since the backbone generation (Stage-1) and
side-chain packing (Stage-2) are disentangled, we can employ a hierarchical K × M sampling strategy that
significantly expands the exploration of the conformational landscape with minimal computational overhead.
Tree-Structured Inference. Instead of performing expensive full-atom recycling for every sample, we first
generate K diverse backbone scaffolds using the lightweight backbone flow model. For generated backbones
{Bk }K                                                                           k K,M
     k=1 , we then sample K × M distinct side-chain packing configurations {Cm }k,m=1 in parallel using
the generative packing model. This approach leverages the reduced parameter size of our specialized sub-
modules, enabling high-throughput generation orders of magnitude faster than repeatedly running large-scale
AF2-based models (Zhu et al., 2025; Rettie et al., 2025).
Broad Potential Well Coverage. This hierarchical strategy is crucial for the success of the subsequent
Physics-Aware Optimization (Stage-3). As aforementioned, the energy landscape of cyclic peptides is


                                                        6
rugged, containing numerous deep, narrow local minima separated by high energy barriers. By generating
a massive ensemble of conformations (K × M ), MuCO effectively seeds a wide variety of potential wells.
Consequently, the force-field relaxation does not need to traverse high barriers globally but simply descends
from these diverse initialized points into their respective local minima. This greatly increases the probability
of locating the true global minimum and discovering novel, low-energy metastable states that are often missed
by deterministic prediction (Zhu et al., 2025).


4       Experiments
We evaluate the performance of MuCO in physical stability, structural diversity, secondary structure recovery,
and computational efficiency. In particular, we conduct benchmarks on the curated CPSea dataset to
demonstrate the advantages of our MuCO over state-of-the-art methods in peptide cyclization. All inference
experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU.
The following subsections highlight the most representative experimental results. We provide exhaustive
numerical comparisons across all sub-datasets and a wide array of visualizations in the Appendix F.

4.1     Experimental Setup
Dataset Construction. Besides developing MuCO, another contribution of our work is constructing a
large-scale, paired benchmark datasets for peptide cyclization based on the CPSea repository (Yang et al.,
2025). In particular, for each target cyclic conformation Xcyc in CPSea, we generated a corresponding linear
precursor Xlin using SimpleFold 3M (Wang et al., 2025b) based on the amino acid sequence S . Given all
linear-cyclic peptide pairs, we apply a rigorous data filtering pipeline, constructing the proposed dataset using
those high-confidence conformation pairs. Finally, this dataset is partitioned into mutually exclusive subsets
based on functional annotations to prevent data leakage: CPSea-Train (The conformation pairs for training
and validation), CP-Bind (high affinity), CP-Trans (cell-penetrating), CP-Core (initial intersection subset
of CP-Bind and CP-Trans), and CPSea-PDB (gold standard data from Protein Data Bank). The last four
subsets lead to a testing set containing 10,132 cyclic conformations in total. These conformations work as the
Ground Truth (GT) and provide references when evaluating model performance. Detailed filtering strategy
and analysis of datasets are provided in Appendix C.
Baselines and Implementations. We compare MuCO against two categories of state-of-the-art methods:
i) Peptide folding models adapted from AF2, including HighFold2 (Zhu et al., 2025) and AfCycDesign (Ret-
tie et al., 2025). These two models are pretrained on the AF2 dataset that has covered CPSea.
ii) Geometric Deep Learning (GDL) models for all-atom conformation prediction and optimization, including
EGNN (Satorras et al., 2021) and WGFormer (Wang et al., 2025a). These two models are trained to predict
cyclic conformations based on the linear ones.
Notably, all the baselines apply our physics-aware optimization method (i.e., Stage-3 of MuCO) to guarantee
a reasonable success rate when generating cyclic conformations. In addition, when evaluating the model
performance in generation quality, MuCO applies the single sampling mode (i.e. setting K = M = 1) for a
fair comparison. Training details of the baselines are provided in Appendix A.
Metrics. We evaluate performance using three key dimensions: i) Success Rate, defined as the percentage of
generated conformations satisfying geometric bond criteria; ii) Physical Stability, measured by the mean
potential energy (E ) calculated via Charmm36; and iii) Diversity, quantified by the Shannon Entropy (H ) of
cyclization modes1 (HC ) and secondary structure clusters (HSS ). Detailed descriptions of the metrics are
provided in Appendix D.
    1
    We consider three cyclization modes in this study, including i) H2T (Head-to-Tail cyclization mode), ii) C2C (Cys-Cys mode
corresponding to Disulfide), iii) K2DE (Isopeptide bond of K(Lys)-D(Asp) or K-E(Glu) in side chains). Detailed definitions are
provided in Appendix B.1.


                                                              7
4.2    Main Results: Generation Quality and Diversity
MuCO Overcomes Mode Collapse with Lower Energy. We conduct baselines and a single sample on
MuCO to fairly compare their effectiveness in cyclization. Table 1 and Figure 3 present the quantitative
comparison of four test sets. A critical observation is the trade-off between Success Rate and Physical
Stability. Although AF2-based methods (HighFold2 and AfCycDesign) achieve near-perfect success rates
(> 98%), they suffer from severe mode collapse, showing zero diversity (H ≈ 0) and failing to cover
alternative cyclization modes (e.g., virtually 0% coverage for K2DE and Cys2Cys modes). Furthermore, their
predicted conformations often reside in high-energy states, indicating unresolved steric clashes. In contrast,
MuCO achieves the lowest potential energy across all datasets, significantly outperforming the baselines.
Crucially, MuCO maintains high structural diversity, successfully recovering a balanced distribution of
cyclization modes compared to the ground truth. Notably, MuCO reaches a success rate of around 95% even
in the single sampling mode. These results confirm that our method effectively learns a physically meaningful
and diverse conformational ensemble rather than memorizing a single mean conformation.

Table 1 . The average performance on the testing set. In the single sampling mode, MuCO achieves the best balance
between physical stability and structural diversity.


                Method                                            Succ.↑         Energy↓                     Div.↑             Mode Distribution (%)
                                                                    (%)          (kJ/mol)                    (H)              H2T             K2DE         C2C
                GT (Ref.)                                             -            -15.8                     0.59             23.2            72.6         4.2
                EGNN                                               85.6            108.2                     0.57             22.5            75.2         2.3
                WGFormer                                           86.2            104.9                     0.58             21.6            76.0         2.4
                AfCycDesign                                        98.4            116.4                     0.01             99.9             0.1         0.0
                HighFold2                                          98.9            111.3                     0.00             99.9            0.0          0.0
                MuCO (Ours)                                        94.0             30.2                     0.69             49.0            50.5         0.6



                                       105
                                                   (a) Success Rate (%)                                          (b) Mean Energy
              Success Percentage (%)




                                       100
                                                                                                     100
                                        95
                                                                                       kJ/mol




                                        90                                                               0
                                        85
                                                                                                     100
                                        80
                                        75                                                           200
                                         CPTrans       CPBind         CPCore    CPSea PDB              CPTrans       CPBind          CPCore    CPSea PDB

                                       1.0
                                             (c) Structural Diversity (H)                            100
                                                                                                         (d) Mode Dist. (%) on CPTrans
                                                                                                                                                       Modes
                                       0.8                                                            80                                                   H2T
                                                                                                                                                           K2DE
                Entropy Score




                                                                                        Percentage




                                       0.6                                                            60                                                   C2C

                                       0.4                                                            40
                                       0.2                                                            20
                                       0.0
                                                                                              0
                                         CPTrans       CPBind          CPCore   CPSea PDB         GT             EGNN WG AfCyc HF2 MuCO
                                                                MuCO (Ours)        EGNN (GDL)                      AfCycDesign (AF2)
                                                                Ground Truth       WGFormer (GDL)                  HighFold2 (AF2)


Figure 3 . (a) Success Rate (%): Percentage of successful cyclization. (b) Mean Potential Energy (E): Physical
stability calculated via Charmm36. (c) Structural Diversity (HC ): Shannon entropy of conformational clusters. (d) Mode
distribution coverage on the CPTrans dataset.



                                                                                                     8
Secondary Structure Recovery. Beyond global topology, we further analyze local secondary structures in
Figures 4 and 5. EGNN and WGFormer fail to form regular structures, especially in β -sheets, resulting in
excessive random coils (> 90%) with high energy. Although AF2-based models capture more secondary
structure information, the structural diversity remains far behind the ground truth. MuCO significantly
improves the recovery of α-helices and β -sheets, closely matching the distribution of the Ground Truth
conformations. The high diversity score (H = 0.8 on average) further indicates that MuCO generates a rich
mixture of secondary structures, ensuring the functional versatility of the generated cyclic peptides.

                                   (a) Structural Diversity (H) (b) Secondary Structure Dist. on CPSea PDB
                                                                                             100                                 Structures
                                   1.0                                                                                                Helix
                                                                                                                                      Sheet
                                                                                              80                                      Coil

                                   0.8
                 Shannon Entropy




                                                                           Composition (%)
                                                                                              60

                                   0.6
                                                                                              40

                                   0.4
                                                                                              20


                                   0.2                                                         0
                                     CPTrans CPBind     CPCore CPSea PDB                           GT EGNN WG AfCyc HF2 MuCO
                                                Dataset
                                                      MuCO (Ours)          EGNN (GDL)                        AfCycDesign (AF2)
                                                      Ground Truth         WGFormer (GDL)                    HighFold2 (AF2)


Figure 4 . (a) Secondary Structural Diversity (HSS ) across different test sets; MuCO maintains superior ensemble
diversity compared to all baselines. (b) Secondary structure composition (Helix, Sheet, and Coil) on the CPSea-PDB
dataset. MuCO significantly improves the recovery of regular secondary structures.




Figure 5 . Case study on structural fidelity. Visual comparison of predicted conformations for a representative sample
from the CPSea PDB dataset. Under single sampling, MuCO reconstructs the native-like α-helical motif and achieves
significantly lower potential energy (E) compared to representative baselines.




                                                                                               9
4.3    Analysis of Sampling Strategy
Efficiency of Hierarchical Exploration. Beyond the single sampling mode, MuCO can accelerate the
exploration of the cyclic conformation space by the proposed hierarchical parallel sampling strategy. In
Figure 6, we analyze the impact of increasing the sampling budget (K Backbone states × M Side-chain
states). We observe a significant improvement in effectiveness: increasing the sampling budget drastically
improves the cyclization mode coverage and achieves a success rate of 100%. Higher sampling density
allows MuCO to discover more feasible cyclization modes given the same sequence (e.g. > 90% coverage
for both H2T and K2DE), a capability completely absent in deterministic prediction models like HighFold2.


                                    101
                                          (a) Success Rate (%)                                  (b) Mode Coverage on CPCore
                                                                                                                                        H2T Coverage
                                    100                                                                                                 K2DE Coverage
                                                                                                100                                     C2C Coverage
                                     99
                                                                                                 80
                                     98
                 Success Rate (%)




                                                                               Percentage (%)
                                     97
                                                                                                 60
                                     96
                                     95                                                          40

                                     94
                                                                                                 20
                                     93
                                     92                                                           0
                                      CPCore                       CPSea PDB                          GT    HF2 MuCO MuCO MuCO
                                                                                                                 1x1 5x5 10x10

                                                    Ground Truth          MuCO (1x1)                       MuCO (5x5)    MuCO (10x10)
                                                    HighFold2             MuCO (1x10)                      MuCO (10x1)


Figure 6 . (a) Success rate as a function of the number of backbone (K) and side-chain (M ) samples. (b) Cyclization
mode coverage (H2T and K2DE) on the CPCore dataset. Increasing sampling density allows MuCO to discover feasible
cyclization modes.

In particular, in a sample budget of 10 × 10, MuCO achieves a mean energy of -3.9 kJ/mol in CPCore and
-247.6 kJ/mol in CPSea PDB, which surpasses the stability of Ground Truth conformations as shown in
Figure 7. In addition, the amortized sampling time per conformation is reduced to the millisecond scale
(≈ 41ms) as shown in Table 2, detailed sampling strategies and results are provided in Appendix E.

Table 2 . Comparison of model complexity and inference efficiency. MuCO (Parallel) achieves the lowest amortized
latency per sample (K × M = 100) while maintaining a significantly smaller parameter footprint than folding-based
methods.


                            Method                                      Trainable Params ↓                               Amortized Time ↓
                            AfCycDesign                                                         92.3M                            4236ms
                            HighFold2                                                           92.3M                            4512ms
                            WGFormer                                                            78.8M                             103ms
                            EGNN                                                                1.5M                               72ms
                            MuCO (Parallel)                                                     40.2M                             41ms

                 Note: Amortized time for MuCO is measured over 100 parallel samples. Our method is
                 ∼1.7× faster than the lightweight EGNN and > 100× faster than folding-based baselines.




                                                                                                  10
                                                          (a) CPCore Energy Sampling                                                                     (b) CPSea PDB Energy Sampling
                                 10                                                                                                        10                                                                         126
                                                                                                              90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      144
                                                                                                              75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      162




                                                                                                                  Mean Energy (kJ/mol)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mean Energy (kJ/mol)
           Stage 2 Samples (M)
                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      180
                                                                                                              45
                                   5                                                                                                           5                                                                      198
                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      216




                                                                                                                                                       GT:
                                                                                                              15




                                                                                                                                                        -184
                                                          GT                                                                                                                                                          234




                                                                                                                                                         .0
                                                            :4                                                0
                                                              8.4
                                   1                                                                                                           1                                                                      252
                                        1                                 5                         10                                             1                      5                              10
                                                                    Stage 1 Samples (K)                                                                            Stage 1 Samples (K)

Figure 7 . The heatmaps display the mean potential energy for (a) CPCore and (b) CPSea PDB as a function of Stage-1
(backbone generation) and Stage-2 (side-chain packing) sample sizes. MuCO is capable of identifying metastable states
with energies comparable to or lower than the ground truth through two stages of efficient parallel sampling.


4.4    Ablation Studies
Necessity of Generative Modeling. We validate our multi-stage generative modeling strategy in Figure 8. In
particular, replacing the flow-based backbone generator of Stage-1 with an EGNN leads to a significant drop
in success rate and diversity, confirming that the flow matching is essential to generate valid cyclic topologies.
Similarly, replacing the flow-based side-chain packing module of Stage-2 with an EGNN results in higher
energies, indicating that deterministic packing cannot resolve the dense steric constraints of macro-cycles as
well as the generative method does. These results demonstrate the rationality of our model design.

                                                                 (a) Success Rate (%)                                                                          (b) Mean Energy
                                                  100                                                                                    100
                                 Percentage (%)




                                                    90
                                                                                                              kJ/mol




                                                                                                                                           0

                                                    80                                                                                   100


                                                    70                                                                                   200
                                                     CPTrans            CPBind        CPCore     CPSea PDB                                 CPTrans               CPBind         CPCore       CPSea PDB
                                                           (c) Secondary Structure (H)                                                             (d) SS Dist. (%) on CPSea PDB
                                                                                                                                         100                                                        Structures
                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Helix
                                  Shannon Entropy




                                                                                                                                          80
                                                                                                                  Percentage (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sheet
                                                    0.8                                                                                                                                                       Coil
                                                                                                                                          60
                                                    0.6
                                                                                                                                          40
                                                    0.4                                                                                   20

                                                    0.2                                                                                    0
                                                      CPTrans           CPBind        CPCore     CPSea PDB                                              GT       EGNN S1 EGNN S2             MuCO
                                                                        MuCO (Ours)            EGNN Stage 1                                    EGNN Stage 2                   Ground Truth


Figure 8 . Comparison between the full MuCO model and the variants with EGNN-based deterministic Stage-1 or
Stage-2. (a-b) Success rate and mean energy; (c-d) Secondary structure diversity and distribution.

Necessity of Physics-Aware Optimization. Figure 9 provides a deep dive into the role of Stage-3. An
intriguing finding is that the raw MuCO output (w/o Opt) is dominated by random coils (Helix ≈ 0%),
representing a poorly regulated but topologically valid potential well. Stage-3 acts as a potent folding driver,

                                                                                                                                 11
condensing these coils into well-defined helices and sheets. In contrast, HighFold2 shows minimal change
after optimization, suggesting that its predictions are rigid and trapped in high-energy local minima. This result
reveals that MuCO’s generative stages effectively seed the correct potential well, allowing physics-based
optimization to efficiently descend into low-energy states corresponding to valid conformations.

                        (a) Structural Diversity (H) Recovery                              (b)
                                                                                            35
                                                                                               -Helix Content Recovery (%)

                                   1.0                                                           30

                                   0.8                                                           25
                 Shannon Entropy




                                                                                Percentage (%)
                                                                                                 20
                                   0.6
                                                                                                 15
                                   0.4
                                                                                                 10

                                   0.2                                                            5

                                   0.0                                                            0
                                     CPTrans   CPBind      CPCore   CPSea PDB                     CPTrans   CPBind    CPCore    CPSea PDB
                                                   Dataset                                                      Dataset
                                                 Ground Truth           MuCO (Ours)                           MuCO (w/o Opt.)
                                                 HighFold2 (Full)       HighFold2 (w/o Opt.)


Figure 9 . (a) Recovery of structural diversity (HSS ) before and after optimization. (b) Comparison of α-helix content
recovery against Ground Truth and baselines. Stage-3 refines stochastically sampled coordinates around potential wells
into physically realizable local minima and well-defined secondary structural motifs.

5    Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we introduced MuCO, a multi-stage conformation optimization framework for generative
peptide cyclization. Our method overcomes the mode collapse of existing methods by combining generative
modeling with physics-aware optimization. Using an efficient hierarchical sampling strategy, MuCO explores
the rugged energy landscape of cyclic peptides more effectively than deterministic prediction, achieving
superior physical stability and structural diversity. By bridging the gap between static conformation prediction
and dynamic physical reality, MuCO provides a computational tool for exploring the conformational space of
macrocycles, potentially accelerating the design of peptide therapeutics.
Limitations and Future Work. Technically, our method focuses on monomeric peptides with terminal
based cyclizations, and its backbone folding efficiency degrades in ultra-long sequences. In addition, from a
practical drug discovery perspective, current evaluations still lack comprehensive metrics on pharmaceutical
properties and synthesibility. Therefore, future work will aim to design more physically meaningful model
architectures and extend MuCO to multi-chain complexes and more diverse data sources. We are planning to
collaborate with biologists on wet-lab verification and data annotation, paving the way for broader and more
practical applications in drug design.


References
Josh Abramson, Jonas Adler, Jack Dunger, Richard Evans, Tim Green, Alexander Pritzel, Olaf Ronneberger, et al.
  Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with AlphaFold 3. Nature, 630(8016):493–500, 2024.
Avishek Joey Bose, Tara Akhound-Sadegh, Guillaume Huguet, Kilian Fatras, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Cheng-Hao Liu,
  Andrei Cristian Nica, Maksym Korablyov, Michael Bronstein, and Alexander Tong. SE(3)-stochastic flow matching
  for protein backbone generation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.


                                                                             12
Chai Discovery team, Jacques Boitreaud, Jack Dent, Matthew McPartlon, Joshua Meier, Vinicius Reis, Alex Ro-
  gozhonikov, and Kevin Wu. Chai-1: Decoding the molecular interactions of life. bioRxiv, pages 2024–10, 2024.
Ricky T. Q. Chen and Yaron Lipman. Flow matching on general geometries. In 12th International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Ruslan L. Davidchack, Richard Handel, and M. V. Tretyakov. Langevin thermostat for rigid body dynamics. The
  Journal of Chemical Physics, 130(23), 2009.
P. G. Dougherty, A. Sahni, and D. Pei. Understanding cell penetration of cyclic peptides. Chemical Reviews, 119(17):
   10241–10287, 2019.
S. A. Hollingsworth and R. O. Dror. Molecular dynamics simulation for all. Neuron, 99(6):1129–1143, 2018.
Jing Huang and Alexander D. MacKerell Jr. CHARMM36 all-atom additive protein force field: Validation based on
   comparison to NMR data. Journal of Computational Chemistry, 34(25):2135–2145, 2013.
Guillaume Huguet, James Vuckovic, Kilian Fatras, Eric Thibodeau-Laufer, Pablo Lemos, Riashat Islam, Chenghao
  Liu, et al. Sequence-augmented SE(3)-flow matching for conditional protein generation. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pages 33007–33036, 2024.
X. Ji, A. L. Nielsen, and C. Heinis. Cyclic peptides for drug development. Angewandte Chemie, 136(3):e202308251,
  2024.
Dapeng Jiang, Xiangzhe Kong, Jiaqi Han, Mingyu Li, Rui Jiao, Wenbing Huang, Stefano Ermon, Jianzhu Ma, and Yang
  Liu. Zero-shot cyclic peptide design via composable geometric constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.04225, 2025.
X. Jing and K. Jin. A gold mine for drug discovery: Strategies to develop cyclic peptides into therapies. Medicinal
  Research Reviews, 40(2):753–810, 2020.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger, Kathryn Tun-
  yasuvunakool, et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589,
  2021.
A. C.-L. Lee, J. L. Harris, K. K. Khanna, and J.-H. Hong. A comprehensive review on current advances in peptide drug
  development and design. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 20(10):2383, 2019.
Jin Sub Lee and Philip M. Kim. FlowPacker: Protein side-chain packing with torsional flow matching. Bioinformatics,
   41(3):btaf010, 2025.
Yi-Lun Liao, Brandon M. Wood, Abhishek Das, and Tess Smidt. EquiformerV2: Improved equivariant transformer for
  scaling to higher-degree representations. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Allan dos Santos Costa, et al. Language
  models of protein sequences at the scale of evolution enable accurate structure prediction. bioRxiv, 2022:500902,
  2022.
M. Mannes, C. Martin, C. Menet, and S. Ballet. Wandering beyond small molecules: Peptides as allosteric protein
 modulators. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 43(5):406–423, 2022.
Saro Passaro, Gabriele Corso, Jeremy Wohlwend, Mateo Reveiz, Stephan Thaler, Vignesh Ram Somnath, Noah Getz,
  et al. Boltz-2: Towards accurate and efficient binding affinity prediction. bioRxiv, 2025.
Elke Persch, Oliver Dumele, and Francois Diederich. Molecular recognition in chemical and biological systems.
  Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 54(11):3290–3327, 2015.
P. Pracht, F. Bohle, and S. Grimme. Automated exploration of the low-energy chemical space with fast quantum
   chemical methods. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 22(14):7169–7192, 2020.
Stephen A. Rettie, Katelyn V. Campbell, Asim K. Bera, Alex Kang, Simon Kozlov, Yensi Flores Bueso, Joshmyn De La
  Cruz, et al. Cyclic peptide structure prediction and design using AlphaFold2. Nature Communications, 16(1):4730,
  2025.
Víctor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E(n) equivariant graph neural networks. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pages 9323–9332. PMLR, 2021.


                                                         13
Tamar Schlick, Stephanie Portillo-Ledesma, Christopher G. Myers, Lauren Beljak, Justin Chen, Sami Dakhel, Daniel
  Darling, et al. Biomolecular modeling and simulation: A prospering multidisciplinary field. Annual Review of
  Biophysics, 50(1):267–301, 2021.
Ashok Sekhar and Lewis E. Kay. NMR paves the way for atomic level descriptions of sparsely populated, transiently
  formed biomolecular conformers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(32):12867–12874, 2013.
Q. Song, Z. Cheng, M. Kariuki, S. C. L. Hall, S. K. Hill, J. Y. Rho, and S. Perrier. Molecular self-assembly and
  supramolecular chemistry of cyclic peptides. Chemical Reviews, 121(22):13936–13995, 2021.
Gian Marco Visani, William Galvin, Michael Pun, and Armita Nourmohammad. H-Packer: Holographic rotationally
  equivariant convolutional neural network for protein side-chain packing. In Machine Learning in Computational
  Biology, pages 230–249. PMLR, 2024.
Fanmeng Wang, Minjie Cheng, and Hongteng Xu. WGFormer: An SE(3)-transformer driven by Wasserstein gradient
  flows for molecular ground-state conformation prediction. In 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2025a.
Yuyang Wang, Jiarui Lu, Navdeep Jaitly, Josh Susskind, and Miguel Angel Bautista. Simplefold: Folding proteins is
  simpler than you think. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.18480, 2025b.
Jeremy Wohlwend, Gabriele Corso, Saro Passaro, Noah Getz, Mateo Reveiz, Ken Leidal, Wojtek Swiderski, et al.
  Boltz-1: Democratizing biomolecular interaction modeling. bioRxiv, pages 2024–11, 2025.
Ziyi Yang, Hanyuan Xie, Yinjun Jia, Xiangzhe Kong, Jiqing Zheng, Ziting Zhang, Yang Liu, Lei Liu, and Yanyan Lan.
  CPSea: Large-scale cyclic peptide-protein complex dataset for machine learning in cyclic peptide design. In The
  Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2025.
Jason Yim, Andrew Campbell, Andrew Y. K. Foong, Michael Gastegger, José Jiménez-Luna, Sarah Lewis, Victor Garcia
  Satorras, et al. Fast protein backbone generation with SE(3) flow matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05297, 2023a.
Jason Yim, Brian L. Trippe, Valentin De Bortoli, Emile Mathieu, Arnaud Doucet, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi S.
  Jaakkola. SE(3) diffusion model with application to protein backbone generation. In 40th International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023b.
Angxiao Yue, Zichong Wang, and Hongteng Xu. ReQFlow: Rectified quaternion flow for efficient and high-quality
  protein backbone generation. 2025.
Chengyun Zhang, Wentong Wang, Ning Zhu, Zhigang Cao, Yaling Wu, Qingyi Mao, Cheng Zhu, Chenhao Zhang,
  Jingjing Guo, and Hongliang Duan. AlphaFold3 for noncanonical cyclic peptide modeling: Hierarchical benchmarking
  reveals accuracy and practical guidelines. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 65(18):9777–9789, 2025.
Yangtian Zhang, Zuobai Zhang, Bozitao Zhong, Sanchit Misra, and Jian Tang. DiffPack: A torsional diffusion model
  for autoregressive protein side-chain packing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36,
  pages 48150–48172, 2023.
Cheng Zhu, Sen Cao, Tianfeng Shang, Jingjing Guo, An Su, Chengxi Li, and Hongliang Duan. Predicting the structures
  of cyclic peptides containing unnatural amino acids by HighFold2. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 26(3):bbaf202, 2025.
A. Zorzi, K. Deyle, and C. Heinis. Cyclic peptide therapeutics: Past, present and future. Current Opinion in Chemical
  Biology, 38:24–29, 2017.




                                                         14
A       Training Details
A.1     Training Protocols and Hyperparameters
A.1.1    Stage-1: Backbone Flow Matching
The backbone generation module is built on the FoldFlow-2 architecture (Huguet et al., 2024), employing
a tripartite structure of an encoder, a multi-modal fusion trunk, and a geometric decoder. Each component
is stacked with 2 blocks of Invariant Point Attention (IPA) or transformer layers. To integrate sequence
information, we utilize a frozen ESM2-650M model, projecting its output into 128-dimensional sequential
and 128-dimensional pair representations. In the subsequent combiner module, these are fused into a joint
latent space with sequential and pair dimensions of 128 and 64. The model operates on the SE(3) manifold
with a coordinate scaling factor of 0.1 to normalize the translational variance.
The training objective Lbackbone is a multi-task composite loss that penalizes errors in flow prediction and
structural geometry. We define total loss as a weighted sum of five components:

                       Lbackbone = Ltrans + 0.5Lrot + Lbb_atom + Ldist_mat + 0.25Laux ,                      (5)

where Ltrans and Lrot are flow matching losses for the translational and rotational components. To ensure
local and global structural consistency, we introduce backbone atom loss Lbb_atom and distance matrix loss
Ldist_mat , both of which are activated for diffusion times t > 0.25. Finally, an auxiliary loss Laux is used to
penalize deviations in bond lengths and angles, ensuring that the generated scaffolds are physically reliable
before entering the packing stage.

A.1.2    Stage-2: Side-chain Flow Matching
The side-chain packing module leverages the EquiformerV2 architecture to model cyclic macrocycles (Liao
et al., 2024; Lee and Kim, 2025). The network consists of 4 equivariant layers with 256 sphere channels
and 256 edge channels. We set the maximum degree of spherical harmonics at Lmax = 3 and the azimuthal
quantum number at Mmax = 1. The attention mechanism is configured with 8 heads and a hidden dimension
of 64. The input node features (95-dim) include one-hot amino acid identities and backbone torsion angles
(ψ, τ, ω ), while the edge features (261-dim) combine E(3)-invariant geometric features with our proposed
cyclic relative positional encodings to account for the ring-closed topology.
The model is trained using a Torsional Flow Matching objective on the hypertorus T4L . The training loss is
defined as:
                       Lpacking = Et,χ1 ,χt w(t)∥vτC (χt , t, B, S) − uCt (χt | χ1 )∥2 ,
                                                                                     
                                                                                                        (6)
where w(t) = (1 − t)−2 is a weighting factor that prioritizes precision as the trajectory approaches the clean
data state (t → 1). We adopt the velocity field formulation to optimize the flow. For residues with inherent
π -symmetry, such as Phenylalanine or Tyrosine, the loss is computed using a mod π operation on the torsion
angles to prevent the model from being penalized for predicting symmetry-equivalent rotameric states.

A.2     Hardware and Other Training Details
All models were trained on four NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPUs (24GB VRAM each) and an Intel(R) Xeon(R)
Gold 6348 CPU (112 logic cores, 2.60GHz). For Stage-1 (Backbone), each GPU consumed approximately
16GB of VRAM. Due to the requirement of high-throughput data loading for large-scale backbone ensembles,
the CPU utilization remained near maximum capacity during this stage. Stage-2 (Side-chain) was more
memory-efficient, utilizing roughly 12GB of VRAM per GPU. Both stages were implemented in PyTorch
and optimized using the AdamW optimizer.
We utilized the CPSea dataset as our data source and partitioned it into training set and validation set. During
the training process, we observed that the backbone flow matching module converged with relative stability,

                                                      15
but the side-chain packing module fluctuates severely, likely due to the highly constrained and rugged energy
landscape of dense macrocycles.
For training configurations. In Stage-1: the model was trained for 100 epochs with a learning rate of 2 × 10−4
and a total batch size of 256. Each epoch took approximately 12 minutes to complete, totaling roughly 20
hours of training time. In Stage-2: we set the learning rate at 1 × 10−4 and the batch size at 128. This stage
was also trained for 100 epochs, each epoch taking approximately 8 minutes, resulting in a total training
duration of approximately 13 hours. We utilized an exponential moving average (EMA) with a decay rate of
0.999 to stabilize the training dynamics. To ensure the robustness of the flow matching, a velocity field loss
was adopted with a tolerance ϵ = 2 × 10−4 during training.
In particular, in our baselines, EGNN and WGFormer were trained on CPSea using the corresponding linear
peptide conformations as structural priors. Conversely, for AF2-based models, we utilized their pre-trained
weights without further fine-tuning. This is justified by the fact that the CPSea dataset (excluding the PDB
subset) is largely derived from AF2 predictions; thus, these models can be considered to have prior exposure
to the underlying data distribution.

A.3    Algorithm
We present the training procedure for our decoupled flow matching modules in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Training of MuCO Decoupled Flow Modules
 1: Input: Dataset D = {(S, X)} (Sequences S and Conformations X )
 2: Parameters: Backbone Flow Network vθB , Side-chain Flow Network vτC
 3: Hyperparameters: Time distribution p(t) = U[0, 1]
 4: while not converged do
 5:   Sample batch (S, X) ∼ D
 6:   Decompose X into Backbone frames B1 and Side-chain torsions C1
 7:   // — Stage-1: Backbone Flow Matching Training —
 8:   Sample time t ∼ p(t)
 9:   Sample prior B0 ∼ pB                    3
                          prior {Gaussian on R , Isotropic on SO(3)}
10:   Compute geodesic path Bt between B0 and B1 on (SE(3) × T)L
11:   Compute target vector field uBt (Bt | B1 )
12:   Lbackbone ← Ltrans + 0.5Lrot + Lbb_atom + Ldist_mat + 0.25Laux
13:   Update θ by minimizing Lbackbone
14:   // — Stage-2: Side-chain Flow Training —
15:   Sample time t ∼ p(t)
16:   Sample prior C0 ∼ U(T4L ) {Uniform on Torus}
17:   Compute geodesic path Ct between C0 and C1 on T4L
                                    C
18:                        field Cut (Ct | C1 )
      Compute target vector
      Lpacking ← Et,χ1 ,χt w(t)∥vτ (χt , t, B, S) − uCt (χt | χ1 )∥2
                                                                     
19:
20:   Update τ by minimizing Lpacking
21: end while




                                                     16
B     Rule-based Topology Detection and Physics Refinement
To bridge the gap between the probabilistic samples generated by flow matching stages and the particular
physical constraints required for downstream applications, we implemented an automated rule-based topology
detection and refinement strategy. This strategy ensures that the generated conformations strictly adhere to
specific chemical bonding criteria and facilitates energy minimization to find potential wells automatically.

B.1    Implicit Constraint Subspaces
We define the associated implicit constraint subspaces ΩC for the three most prevalent cyclization strategies
in the CPSea dataset. Let xi,atom denote the Cartesian coordinates of a specific atom in residue i. We define
the target equilibrium peptide bond length as dpep = 1.33 Å and the disulfide bond length as dSS = 2.05 Å.
A tolerance δ = 0.1 Å is applied to verify successful closure.
Head-to-Tail Cyclization (ΩH2T ): Closure is achieved by forming a peptide bond between the N-terminus of
the first residue (i = 1) and the C-terminus of the last residue (i = L):

                               ΩH2T = {X | ∥x1,N − xL,C ∥2 ∈ [dpep − δ, dpep + δ]} .                         (7)

                       (i,j)
Disulfide Bridging (ΩSS ): A covalent bond forms between the sulfur atoms (Sγ ) of two cysteine residues at
positions i and j :
                                        ∥xi,Sγ − xj,Sγ ∥2 ∈ [dSS − δ, dSS + δ],
                                                                               
                          (i,j)
                        ΩSS = X                                                                         (8)
                                        where si = Cys, sj = Cys.

                                       (i,j)
Side-chain Isopeptide Linkage (ΩIso ): An amide bond forms between a Lys side-chain amine (Nζ ) and an
Asp/Glu side-chain carboxylate (Cγ for Asp or Cδ for Glu):
                                (                                                     )
                         (i,j)         ∥xi,N ζ − x
                                                   j,Cδ/γ ∥2 ∈ [dpep − δ, d pep + δ],
                       ΩIso = X                                                                    (9)
                                       where si = Lys, sj ∈ {Asp, Glu}.

B.2    Topology Inference and Force Field Optimization
Prioritized Inference Logic: Since the cyclization mode is not explicitly labeled during inference, we adopt
a priority-based detection strategy. The algorithm first identifies all Cys-Cys pairs; if the distance between
any pair’s Sγ -Sγ is less than 2.5 Å, it is assigned as a disulfide bridge. If no such pair exists but potential
isopeptide residues (Lys, Asp/Glu) are present, we compare the current distance of the closest isopeptide pair
with the head-to-tail distance, selecting the shorter of the two. In all other cases, the peptide is treated as
head-to-tail cyclic.
Force Field Patching: We utilize the CHARMM36 force field (Huang and Jr., 2013) for local geometry
refinement. Standard residue templates are insufficient for cyclic bonds because of atom loss. We implemented
custom patches to handle these transitions: the Cys template removes sulfur hydrogen (HG); the Lys template
removes two hydrogens from the Nζ amine; the Asp/Glu templates remove the hydroxyl group (OH) from
the side-chain carboxylate; and the backbone H2T mode performs standard dehydration.
Validation and Success Criteria: After 500 steps of Steepest Descent (SD) minimization, we perform a
final geometric check. A conformation is only considered valid if its minimized bond length dfinal satisfies
|dfinal − dtarget | ≤ δ . Samples that fail this physics-based threshold are discarded. Given that our datasets
focus on single-mode cyclization, this automated heuristic effectively resolves most of the cases.




                                                        17
B.3    Algorithm

Algorithm 2 Rule-based Topology Detection and Physics Refinement
 1: Input: Raw coordinates X  f, Sequence S , Targets dpep , dSS , Tolerance δ
 2: Output: Refined coordinates X or Failure
 3: Identify reactive pairs P ← {(i, j) | Cys-Cys, Lys-Asp/Glu, 1-L}
 4: if ∃(i, j) ∈ Cys-Cys and ∥xi,Sγ − xj,Sγ ∥2 < 2.5Å then
                  (i,j)
 5:   Mode ← ΩSS
 6: else if ∃(i, j) ∈ Isopeptide candidates then
                                                   (i,j)
 7:    Mode ← (∥Iso-pair∥2 < ∥H2T-pair∥2 )?ΩIso : ΩH2T
 8: else
 9:    Mode ← ΩH2T
10: end if
                                                               f→ X
11: Apply CHARMM36 patches (remove leaving atoms) and minimize X
12: if |dfinal − dtarget | ≤ δ then
13:    return X
14: else
15:    return Failure
16: end if




                                                           18
C     Dataset and Data Processing
To ensure MuCO learns from high-quality and structurally representative cyclic peptides, we curated a
large-scale dataset derived from the CPSea repository (Yang et al., 2025). This section details our filtering
criteria and the statistical characteristics of the resulting subsets.

C.1    Filtering Pipeline
Our filtering process is designed to isolate peptides where the macro-cyclic constraint is the primary deter-
minant of the conformational landscape. First, we select peptides with lengths L ∈ [8, 16], a range that is
most critical for therapeutic applications. Second, we introduce a Backbone Mass Ratio filter (referred to
as Residue Summary). We calculate the relative molecular mass of the cyclic backbone and ensure that it
exceeds 20% of the total molecular weight (ResSum) in the multi-chain conformation. This ensures that the
training conformations are not biased by external chain environments, preserving intrinsic low-energy states
that authentically reflect the geometric influence of the ring-closure.

C.2    Dataset Subsets and Topology
As illustrated in Figure 10, we partition the filtered CPSea dataset into five disjoint subsets based on their
functional annotations and data sources: CPSea: The full set of filtered cyclic peptides (∼75k samples,
Training set). CPBind: Peptides with high binding affinity. CPTrans: Cell-penetrating peptides. CPCore:
The intersection of CPBind and CPTrans, representing the most biologically relevant core. CPSea PDB: A
gold-standard subset consisting of high-resolution structures directly sourced from the Protein Data Bank
(PDB).


                                              CPSea



                                  CPBind         CPCore           CPTrans




                                                CPSea-Train                 CPSea
                                       (neither CPBind nor CPTrans)          PDB



Figure 10 . Venn diagram illustrating the relationships between different CPSea subsets. CPSea PDB serves as an
external high-confidence validation set.
C.3    Data Statistics and Distributions
We provide a comprehensive statistical summary of the sequence and structural features across all subsets in
Table 3. The distributions are further visualized in Figure 11.
Sequence Characteristics. The sequence length distribution across all subsets is negatively skewed (Skew-
ness ≈ −1.3), with a heavy concentration at L = 16 (see Figure 11, left). The mean length ranges from
14.2 to 15.2. The Residue Summary (Backbone Mass Ratio) KDE plots (Figure 11, middle) show a sharp,
unimodal peak at approximately 0.22 with extremely low variance (Std < 0.03), indicating high structural
homogeneity across the filtered dataset.


                                                           19
Cyclization Modes. As shown in the Ring Info distribution (Figure 11, right), the dataset covers three
main cyclization strategies: Stapled (Isopeptide, K-to-DE), Disulfide (Cys-to-Cys), and Head-to-tail. The
stapled peptides are the most numerous in the total CPSea set, and the frequency of Stapled configurations is
particularly high in the CPCore and CPSea PDB subsets (exceeding 80%). This highlights the importance
of side-chain cross-linking in high-confidence cyclic structures. Despite the vast difference in sample sizes
(ranging from 85 in CPSea PDB to more than 75,000 in CPSea) and their functions, the frequency trends
remain remarkably consistent across all subsets.

                 Table 3 . Descriptive statistics of sequence length (L) and backbone mass ratio (ResSum) for CPSea subsets.

                      Category               Dataset                   Count                                     Mean L              Skew (L)               Mean ResSum                                 Skew (ResSum)
                       Training              CPSea (Train)             75,337                                      14.99                 -1.28                       0.2327                                        1.56
                                             CPTrans                     6,590                                     14.23                 -0.66                       0.2300                                        1.68
                                             CPBind                      3,194                                     15.05                 -1.52                       0.2289                                        1.68
                        Testing
                                             CPCore                       263                                      14.40                 -0.80                       0.2273                                        1.59
                                             CPSea PDB                     85                                      15.25                 -1.75                       0.2228                                        0.98


                             Seq Length Distribution by Count                                1e6 Residue Summary Distribution (Count-scale KDE)                                                       Ring Info Distribution by Count
                      CPSea_PDB                                                                                                           CPSea_PDB                                                                                       CPSea_PDB
                      CPCore                                                            1.75                                              CPCore                                                                                          CPCore
        30000         CPSea                                                                                                               CPSea                             40000                                                         CPSea
                      CPBind                                                            1.50                                              CPBind                                                                                          CPBind
        25000         CPTrans                                                                                                             CPTrans                                                                                         CPTrans
                                                                                        1.25                                                                                30000
        20000
                                                                       Count (KDE)




                                                                                        1.00
Count




                                                                                                                                                                    Count
        15000                                                                                                                                                               20000
                                                                                        0.75
        10000                                                                           0.50
                                                                                                                                                                            10000
         5000                                                                           0.25

                 0                                                                      0.00                                                                                         0
                       8           10          12         14      16                                     0.20   0.25   0.30    0.35     0.40  0.45   0.50    0.55                         Stapled                disulfide                   head-to-tail
                                        Seq Length                                                                            Residue Summary                                                                    Ring Info
                           Seq Length Distribution by Frequency                                           Residue Summary Distribution (Probability Density KDE)                                    Ring Info Distribution by Frequency
                      CPSea_PDB                                                                                                                        CPSea_PDB                                                                          CPSea_PDB
                0.5   CPCore                                                                        25                                                 CPCore                       0.8                                                   CPCore
                      CPSea                                                                                                                            CPSea                                                                              CPSea
                      CPBind                                                                                                                           CPBind                                                                             CPBind
                0.4   CPTrans                                                                       20                                                 CPTrans                                                                            CPTrans
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.6
                                                                            Density (probability)




                0.3                                                                                 15
    Frequency




                                                                                                                                                                        Frequency




                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                0.2                                                                                 10


                0.1                                                                                 5                                                                               0.2


                0.0                                                                                 0                                                                               0.0
                       8           10          12         14      16                                     0.20   0.25   0.30    0.35     0.40  0.45   0.50    0.55                         Stapled                disulfide                   head-to-tail
                                        Seq Length                                                                            Residue Summary                                                                    Ring Info


Figure 11 . Distributions of sequence length, backbone mass ratio (Residue Summary), and cyclization modes across
the five subsets. Top row shows absolute counts; bottom row shows normalized frequencies.




                                                                                                                               20
D     Detailed Evaluation Metrics
This section describes the metrics used to assess the generative quality of MuCO. To ensure an equitable
comparison, we implement a unified evaluation protocol: all candidate structures, including MuCO
generations, baseline predictions, and the original Ground Truth (GT) samples, are processed through the
identical force-field optimization pipeline described in Appendix B before any metrics are calculated.

D.1    Structural Diversity via Shannon Entropy
We employ Shannon Entropy (H ) to evaluate the distributional diversity of the model in single-sampling
mode. This metric assesses whether the model’s learned probability density accurately covers the diverse
conformational and topological landscape of cyclic peptides rather than collapsing into a single mode. For a
categorical distribution across n states (such as cyclization modes or secondary structure types), the entropy
is calculated as H = − ni=1 pi ln pi , where pi is the frequency of state i across the test set. We specifically
                         P
report HC to measure the balance between H2T, Disulfide, and Isopeptide modes, and HSS to measure the
mixture of helical, sheet, and coil motifs.

D.2    Physical Stability and Success Rate
The physical validity of the ensembles is quantified by the Success Rate (SR) and the Mean Potential Energy
(E ). The SR is defined as the percentage of structures that satisfy the geometric closure tolerance δ (as defined
in Appendix B) after the minimization process, with the additional requirement that the final potential energy
must remain below 103 kJ/mol. Conformations exceeding this energy threshold are manually categorized as
cyclization failures, as visual inspection reveals that such high-energy states are typically accompanied by
severe side-chain steric clashes and would be physically unstable in nature. Under this rigorous standard, even
structures in unfiltered CPSea datasets may fail to cyclize because some experimental conformations may not
strictly satisfy the specified covalent bond thresholds or force-field equilibrium under the given parameters.
The E represents the average potential energy (kJ/mol) calculated using the Charmm36 force field. By
minimizing all structures including baselines and GT prior to measurement, we ensure a fair comparison that
evaluates each model’s ability to provide a high-quality initial seed that can effectively relax into a stable
local minimum.

D.3    Secondary Structure Assignment
To evaluate local folding fidelity, we perform secondary structure assignment using the mdtraj library,
which implements the Dictionary of Protein Secondary Structure (DSSP) algorithm. Residues are classified
into three simplified categories: Helix (α), Sheet (β ), and Coil (Loop). This automated assignment allows us
to compare the predicted secondary structure distributions against the ground truth. We can then verify if the
model correctly recovers complex motifs, such as trans-annular β -sheets or localized α-helices, which are
essential for the biological function of macro-cyclic peptides.




                                                       21
E     Efficiency and Complexity Analysis
This section provides a detailed analysis of the computational complexity and inference performance of
MuCO. We compare its multi-stage generative architecture against end-to-end folding models and geometric
graph baselines to highlight its advantages in large-scale ensemble generation.

E.1    Model Parameter Comparison
As shown in Table 4, MuCO has a competitive trainable parameter count of 40.2M (22.1M for Stage-1 and
18.0M for Stage-2). Although Stage-1 incorporates a frozen ESM2-650M model, the sequence embeddings
are pre-computed and cached, effectively removing the language model’s overhead from the iterative sampling
loop. AF2-based variants (AfCycDesign and HighFold2) involve 92.3M trainable parameters; despite the
absence of MSAs for shorter peptides, their high-dimensional transformer blocks impose significant memory
and latency costs. In particular, while EGNN has the fewest parameters (1.5M), it exhibits disproportionately
high training and inference latency, requiring approximately 90 minutes per epoch. This is likely due to
the computational overhead of iterative coordinate-dependent message passing, which lacks the vectorized
efficiency of the attention based mechanisms utilized in MuCO and WGFormer.

E.2    Sampling Speed and Parallel Efficiency
The inference efficiency of MuCO is a critical advantage, particularly when modeling the dynamic con-
formational ensembles required for macro-cyclic drug design. As demonstrated in Table 4, we evaluate
the latency across two dimensions: the initialization (loading) phase and the active inference phase. While
AF2-based models are typically deterministic, we treat the outputs from their five standard parameter sets as
5 independent samples to evaluate their search efficiency, while GDL based model only has 1 single sample
(sample size).

The Loading Bottleneck A significant drawback of AfCycDesign and HighFold2 is their extensive model-
loading overhead, which exceeds 50 seconds on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. This delay is primarily
due to the heavy weights of the Evoformer blocks and the complex initialization of the ColabFold-optimized
platform. In contrast, MuCO’s total loading time is approximately 14.6 seconds. Although Stage-1 incor-
porates a large ESM2-650M language model, its impact on latency is mitigated by our caching strategy:
sequence embeddings are computed once and stored in a high-speed buffer, allowing the SE(3) flow matcher
to function with a throughput comparable to lightweight EGNN.

Serial vs. Parallel Throughput In a conventional serial inference setting (sampling one conformation at a
time), MuCO’s total latency is 1219 ms—roughly four times faster than AF2-based models but slower than
regressive GDLs like WGFormer. However, the true strength of MuCO’s decoupled architecture lies in its
tree-structured parallel sampling capability.
Taking advantage of batch-processing, Stage-1 can generate a batch of N = 10 diverse backbone scaffolds
in 1312 ms. Subsequently, Stage-2 populates these scaffolds by sampling M side-chain configurations in
parallel. For instance, populating 100 packing configurations across these 10 backbones requires only 2742
ms in Stage-2. Consequently, the total wall-clock time to generate a high-quality ensemble of 100 physically
refined conformations is:

                    Ttotal = Tbackbone (batch = 10) + Tpacking (batch = 100) ≈ 4054 ms.                  (10)

This translates to an amortized latency of 40.5 ms per sample. In practical terms, while an AF2-based
model is still loading its weights or predicting its first static structure (∼4.5 s), MuCO can deliver a fully
optimized ensemble of 100 diverse low-energy states. Although specific times could vary with server I/O and
CPU load, the trend underscores MuCO’s superior scalability for potential well screening for macro-cycles.


                                                     22
Table 4 . Comparison of model complexity and inference latency on a single RTX 4090 GPU. Parallel latency for
MuCO reflects the total time to generate 100 samples (N = 10, M = 10). Parallel MuCO sampling reaches the lowest
amortized time generating a candidate conformation.

  Method                  Trainable Params   Loading Time     Sample Size   Sampling Time    Amortized Time
  AfCycDesign                       92.3M       53.9 s            5           21182 ms           4236 ms
  HighFold2                         92.3M       52.7 s            5           22561 ms           4512 ms
  WGFormer                          78.8M        7.3 s            1            103 ms             103 ms
  EGNN                              1.5M         6.4 s            1            72 ms              72 ms
  MuCO (Serial)                     40.2M       14.6 s            1            1219 ms           1219 ms
  MuCO (Parallel)                   40.2M       14.6 s           100           4054 ms            41 ms


E.3    Algorithm
We present our hierarchical inference strategy in Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 3 Inference: Hierarchical K × M Sampling & Optimization
 1: Input: Sequence S , Backbone Samples K , Packing Samples M
 2: Output: Optimized Conformation Ensemble Xfinal
 3: {// — Stage-1: Topology Generation (K parallel samples) —}
                (i)
 4: Initialize B0 ∼ pBprior for i = 1 . . . K
 5: for k = 0 to Ksteps − 1 do
 6:   tk ← k/Ksteps
                        (i)
 7:   B (i) ← vθB (Btk , tk , S) {Batched inference}
        (i)                   (i)
 8:    Btk+1 ← Step(Btk , B (i) , ∆t)
 9: end for
                     (i)
10: Set Backbones {B1 }K  i=1
11: {// — Stage-2: Conditional Packing (K × M parallel samples) —}
                (i,j)
12: Initialize C0  ∼ U(T4L ) for i = 1 . . . K, j = 1 . . . M
13: for k = 0 to Ksteps − 1 do
14:   tk ← k/Ksteps
15:   {Condition flow on corresponding backbone i with Cyclic RPE}
                        (i,j)         (i)
16:   C (i,j) ← vτC (Ctk , tk |B1 , S)
        (i,j)     (i,j)
17:    Ctk+1 ← Ctk + C (i,j) · ∆t
18: end for
19: Reconstruct Atoms Xf(i,j) ← ForwardKinematics(B (i) , C (i,j) )
                                                    1      1
20: {// — Stage-3: Physics-Aware Optimization —}
21: for each conformation X (i,j) do
22:    T ← DetectTopology(X  f(i,j) ) {Algorithm 2}
23:   X (i,j) ← Minimize(X  f(i,j) , ECharmm36 , T )
24: end for
25: return Best X (i,j) based on energy E




                                                         23
F     More Experimental Details and Results
F.1     Detailed Experimental Results
Table 5 . Quantitative comparison across four datasets. MuCO consistently outperforms baselines, achieving the lowest
potential energy (E) and maintaining high structural diversity (H) comparable to the ground truth.
                     Dataset: CPTrans                                                  Dataset: CPBind
  Method          Succ. Energy Div.           Modes (%)            Method          Succ. Energy Div.          Modes (%)
                   (%) (kJ/mol) (H) H2T K2DE C2C                                    (%) (kJ/mol) (H) H2T K2DE C2C
  GT (Ref.)    -           6.8     0.57 23.5    74.2    2.3        GT (Ref.)    -           -63.2   0.63 23.9    67.7      8.3
  EGNN        87.6        126.3    0.57 24.3    74.2    1.5        EGNN        80.6         70.8    0.59 20.0    76.0      4.0
  WGFormer    88.2        122.5    0.58 22.1    76.5    1.4        WGFormer    81.5         68.4    0.61 21.5    73.8      4.7
  AfCycDesign 98.5        142.5    0.01 99.9     0.1    0.0        AfCycDesign 98.0         61.2    0.00 99.8    0.2       0.0
  HighFold2   98.9        138.3    0.00 99.9     0.0    0.0        HighFold2   98.7         54.4    0.00 99.9    0.0       0.0
  MuCO        94.2        53.9     0.69 45.6    54.1    0.3        MuCO        93.5         -19.2   0.68 57.2    41.7      1.1

                     Dataset: CPCore                                                Dataset: CPSea PDB
 Method          Succ. Energy Div.            Modes (%)            Method          Succ. Energy Div.          Modes (%)
                  (%) (kJ/mol) (H) H2T K2DE C2C                                    (%) (kJ/mol) (H) H2T K2DE C2C
 GT (Ref.)    -            48.4    0.36 9.8      88.2   2.0        GT (Ref.)     -   -184.0 0.54 11.9             86.9     1.2
 EGNN        91.6         164.1    0.40 11.3     87.5   1.2        EGNN         92.9 -63.1 0.35 12.7              87.3     0.0
 WGFormer    92.1         160.2    0.42 12.5     86.0   1.5        WGFormer     91.8 -58.5 0.41 14.1              85.9     0.0
 AfCycDesign 99.0         180.5    0.00 100.0     0.0   0.0        AfCycDesign 98.8 -35.5 0.00 100.0               0.0     0.0
 HighFold2   99.6         174.3    0.00 100.0     0.0   0.0        HighFold2   100.0 -43.2 0.00 100.0             0.0      0.0
 MuCO        95.1          97.3    0.67 40.8     58.8   0.4        MuCO         94.1 -160.7 0.88 30.0             70.0     0.0

Note: Succ.: Success Rate; H2T: Head to Tail; C2C: Disulfide; K2DE: Isopeptide. Lower energy indicates better stability.


Table 6 . Secondary structure composition analysis. MuCO significantly improves the recovery of α-helices and
β-sheets compared to GNN and AlphaFold2-based baselines. By arranging datasets side-by-side, we observe consistent
performance across all tasks.

                    Dataset: CPTrans                                                   Dataset: CPBind
          Method             α     β   Coil     H                            Method            α     β    Coil   H
          GT (Ref.)        23.8   1.6 74.7 0.89                              GT (Ref.)        13.1 2.8 84.0 0.74
          EGNN             7.4    0.0 92.6 0.38                              EGNN              4.6 0.0 95.4 0.27
          WGFormer          7.8   0.1 92.1 0.40                              WGFormer          5.1 0.2 94.7 0.30
          AfCycDesign       8.5   1.3 90.2 0.51                              AfCycDesign      6.2 2.1 91.7 0.47
          MuCO             23.8   2.8 73.4 0.96                              MuCO             21.8 4.7 73.5 1.01

                     Dataset: CPCore                                                 Dataset: CPSea PDB
          Method             α     β   Coil     H                            Method            α     β    Coil   H
          GT (Ref.)        14.2   2.3 83.4 0.74                              GT (Ref.)        23.0 1.4 75.6 0.87
          EGNN             4.9    0.0 95.1 0.28                              EGNN              9.9 0.0 90.1 0.47
          WGFormer          5.5   0.1 94.4 0.31                              WGFormer         10.5 0.1 89.4 0.49
          AfCycDesign       6.8   1.5 91.7 0.46                              AfCycDesign      10.5 1.2 88.3 0.57
          MuCO             20.7   3.4 75.9 0.93                              MuCO             25.4 3.0 71.6 0.99

Note: Values represent mean percentage (%). Headers abbreviated: α=Helix, β=Sheet. Diversity (H) uses Shannon Entropy.



                                                              24
Table 7 . Impact of sampling strategy on MuCO performance. We evaluate MuCO across different sampling budgets
(K × M ), where K and M denote the number of backbone scaffolds and side-chain configurations. Increasing the
budget significantly lowers the potential energy and improves success rates.


                     Dataset: CPCore                                               Dataset: CPSea PDB
 Config.         Succ.      Energy          Modes (%)              Config.        Succ.     Energy          Modes (%)
 (K × M )         (%) (kJ/mol) (eV) H2T K2DE C2C                   (K × M )        (%) (kJ/mol) (eV) H2T K2DE C2C
 GT (Ref.)     -    48.4 0.50 9.8               88.2    2.0        GT (Ref.)     -        -184.0   -1.91 11.9    86.9   1.2
 HighFold2    99.6 174.3 1.81 100.0              0.0    0.0        HighFold2   100.0       -43.2   -0.45 100.0    0.0   0.0
 MuCO 1 × 1 95.1 96.3 1.00 38.8                 61.2    0.0        MuCO 1 × 1 94.1        -126.8   -1.32 33.8    66.3   0.0
 MuCO 1 × 10 99.6 61.9 0.64 40.8                63.4    0.0        MuCO 1 × 10 100.0      -184.6   -1.92 37.6    70.6   0.0
 MuCO 5 × 5 100.0 20.1 0.21 86.7                85.9    1.9        MuCO 5 × 5 100.0       -231.4   -2.41 85.9    87.1   0.0
 MuCO 10 × 1 100.0 26.0 0.27 94.3               85.9    1.9        MuCO 10 × 1 100.0      -214.9   -2.23 89.4    87.1   0.0
 10 × 10     100.0 -3.9 -0.04 97.7              85.9    3.4        10 × 10     100.0      -247.6   -2.57 94.1    87.1   0.0

Note: Succ.: Success Rate; E: Potential Energy. Mode Coverage indicates the percentage of targets for which at least one valid
conformation of that mode was generated. High sampling budgets (10 × 10) enable recovering multiple feasible modes.




Table 8 . Ablation study of MuCO components. We compare the full framework against variants removing Stage 1
(generative backbone) or Stage 2 (flow-based packing). Stage 1 is crucial for success and diversity, while Stage 2 is
critical for energy minimization.


                    Dataset: CPTrans                                                 Dataset: CPBind
 Method           Succ. Energy Div.         Modes (%)              Method         Succ. Energy Div.          Modes (%)
                   (%) (kJ/mol) (H) H2T K2DE C2C                                   (%) (kJ/mol) (H) H2T K2DE C2C
 GT (Ref.)     -             6.8   0.57 23.5    74.2    2.3        GT (Ref.)     -         -63.2    0.63 23.9    67.7   8.3
 HighFold2    98.9         138.3   0.00 99.9     0.0    0.0        HighFold2    98.7        54.4    0.00 99.9     0.0   0.0
 EGNN Stage 1 85.0         101.9   0.66 36.7    62.8    0.5        EGNN Stage 1 78.1       132.9    0.65 44.0    48.0   8.0
 EGNN Stage 2 95.0          63.6   0.69 52.0    47.9    0.1        EGNN Stage 2 95.0        -6.4    0.65 65.3    34.1   0.6
 MuCO         94.2         53.9    0.69 45.6    54.1    0.3        MuCO         93.5       -19.2    0.68 57.2    41.7   1.1

                     Dataset: CPCore                                               Dataset: CPSea PDB
 Method           Succ. Energy Div.         Modes (%)              Method         Succ. Energy Div.          Modes (%)
                   (%) (kJ/mol) (H) H2T K2DE C2C                                   (%) (kJ/mol) (H) H2T K2DE C2C
 GT (Ref.)     -           48.4    0.36 9.8      88.2   2.0        GT (Ref.)      -       -184.0   0.54 11.9     86.9   1.2
 HighFold2    99.6        174.3    0.00 100.0     0.0   0.0        HighFold2    100.0      -43.2   0.00 100.0     0.0   0.0
 EGNN Stage 1 85.6        139.0    0.61 29.8     70.2   0.0        EGNN Stage 1 81.2      -132.0   0.67 30.4     68.1   1.4
 EGNN Stage 2 92.0         98.8    0.69 44.2     55.4   0.4        EGNN Stage 2 96.5      -138.9   0.97 40.2     59.8   0.0
 MuCO         95.1        97.3     0.67 40.8     58.8   0.4        MuCO          94.1     -160.7   0.88 30.0     70.0   0.0

Note: Succ.: Success Rate; Div.: Diversity. "EGNN Stage 1/2" use regressive EGNN in corresponding stages. The full MuCO model
balances stability and diversity best.




                                                              25
Table 9 . Ablation analysis of secondary structure components. Removing Stage 1 (Backbone) causes collapse into
random coils, while removing Stage 2 (FlowPacking) yields suboptimal distributions. MuCO achieves the most balanced
profile, matching the ground truth diversity (H).


                     Dataset: CPTrans                                                 Dataset: CPBind
           Method             α       β Coil   H                           Method              α       β Coil   H
           GT (Ref.)    23.8 1.6 74.7 0.89                                 GT (Ref.)    13.1 2.8 84.0 0.74
           EGNN Stage 1 8.2 0.0 91.8 0.41                                  EGNN Stage 1 4.9 0.0 95.1 0.28
           EGNN Stage 2 21.6 3.0 75.4 0.94                                 EGNN Stage 2 19.7 4.8 75.4 0.98
           MuCO         23.8 2.8 73.4 0.96                                 MuCO         21.8 4.7 73.5 1.01

                     Dataset: CPCore                                               Dataset: CPSea PDB
           Method             α       β Coil   H                           Method              α       β Coil   H
           GT (Ref.)    14.2 2.3 83.4 0.74                                 GT (Ref.)    23.0 1.4 75.6 0.87
           EGNN Stage 1 4.5 0.1 95.5 0.27                                  EGNN Stage 1 11.2 0.0 88.8 0.51
           EGNN Stage 2 19.2 3.8 77.0 0.93                                 EGNN Stage 2 22.2 3.2 74.5 0.96
           MuCO         20.7 3.4 75.9 0.93                                 MuCO         25.4 3.0 71.6 0.99

Note: Columns represent percentage (%) of α-Helix, β-Sheet, and Coil. H: Diversity (Shannon Entropy). "EGNN Stage 1/2" use
regressive EGNN in corresponding stages. The full MuCO model balances stability and diversity best.




Table 10 . Impact of force field optimization on secondary structure. We compare structural composition before (w/o
Opt.) and after refinement. MuCO exhibits a dramatic transition from disordered raw states to regular structures during
optimization, whereas HighFold2 (HF2) remains largely static.


                     Dataset: CPTrans                                                 Dataset: CPBind
          Method                  α    β Coil H                           Method                   α    β Coil H
          GT (Ref.)       23.8 1.6 74.7 0.89                              GT (Ref.)       13.1 2.8 84.0 0.74
          HF2 (w/o Opt.)  9.0 1.9 89.1 0.57                               HF2 (w/o Opt.)  6.9 3.0 90.1 0.56
          HF2 (Final)      9.5 1.5 89.0 0.56                              HF2 (Final)      7.4 2.5 90.1 0.55
          MuCO (w/o Opt.) 0.0 0.7 99.3 0.06                               MuCO (w/o Opt.) 0.0 1.2 98.8 0.09
          MuCO (Final)    23.8 2.8 73.4 0.96                              MuCO (Final)    21.8 4.7 73.5 1.01

                     Dataset: CPCore                                               Dataset: CPSea PDB
          Method                  α    β Coil H                           Method                   α    β Coil H
          GT (Ref.)       14.2 2.3 83.4 0.74                              GT (Ref.)       23.0 1.4 75.6 0.87
          HF2 (w/o Opt.)  7.1 2.3 90.6 0.53                               HF2 (w/o Opt.) 12.1 3.1 84.8 0.73
          HF2 (Final)      7.5 1.9 90.7 0.52                              HF2 (Final)     12.1 1.5 86.3 0.64
          MuCO (w/o Opt.) 0.0 1.0 99.0 0.08                               MuCO (w/o Opt.) 0.0 0.8 99.2 0.07
          MuCO (Final)    20.7 3.4 75.9 0.93                              MuCO (Final)    25.4 3.0 71.6 0.99

Note: HF2: HighFold2. "w/o Opt." is the raw output before force field refinement; "Final" is after refinement. MuCO effectively
folds disordered (high coil, low H) raw states into regular structures during optimization.




                                                              26
F.2    Examples of Sampling




Figure 12 . Visual Comparison of predicted cyclic peptide conformations across diverse sub-datasets. Even in single
sample mode, MuCO consistently achieves significantly lower potential energy (E) compared to HighFold2 and EGNN
baselines. Notably, MuCO demonstrates superior fidelity in recovering native-like secondary structure motifs (e.g.,
α-helices), whereas the baseline models often collapse into high-energy, disordered states.



                                                        27
Figure 13 . Sample of 1JD6_A_16_31 generated by MuCO. Column (A) shows the Stage-1 backbone scaffolds
(cyan), while columns (B) show the corresponding all-atom samples (green) after Stage 2 and 3. The diversity of k-to-de
and head-to-tail cycles highlights the model’s capacity to sample multiple metastable states. Annotations specify the
cyclization mode and potential energy (kJ/mol).




                                                          28
Figure 14 . Sample of AF-X1M060-F1_0_15_29 generated by MuCO. Column (A) shows the Stage-1 backbone
scaffolds (cyan), while columns (B) show the corresponding all-atom samples (green) after Stage 2 and 3. The peptide
structures demonstrate that MuCO effectively identifies and incorporates two distinct cyclization modes: head-to-tail
backbone closure and cys-to-cys disulfide bridges.




                                                         29
